Measuring the cost of living
Consumer Price Index(CPI)
	A measure of the overall cost of the goods and services bought by a typical consumer
	- Measures the typical consumers' cost of living
	- The basis of cost of living adjustment (COLA) is in many contracts and social security
How is CPI calculated? (5 steps)
	1. Fix the "basket".
		The bureau of labor statistics (BLS) surveys consumers to determine what is in a typical consumer's "shopping basket".
	2. Find the prices.
		The BLS collects data on the prices of all the goods in the basket.
	3. Compute the basket's cost.
		Use the prices to compute the total cost of the basket.
	4. Choose a base year and compute the index.
		The CPI in any year is 100 * cost of basket in current / cost of basket in base
	5. Compute the inflation rate.
		The percentage change in the CPI from the preceding year: (CPI this year - last year / CPI last year) * 100%
Problems With CPI:
	#1 Substitution Bias
		Over time, some prices rise faster than others, so consumers substitute toward goods that become relatively cheaper negating the effects of price increases
		The CPI misses this substitution because it uses a fixed basket of goods.  Therefore, CPI overstates increases in the cost of living.
	#2 Introduction of new goods
		The introduction of new goods increases variety.  Allows consumers to find products that more closely meet their needs.  In essence, dollars become more valuable.
		The CPI misses this effect because it uses a fixed basket of goods.  Thus, the CPI overstates increases in the cost of living.
	#3 Unmeasured quality change
		Improvements in the quality of goods in the basket increases the  value of each dollar
		The BLS tries to account for quality changes but misses some as quality is hard to measure
		Thus, the CPI overstates increases in the cost of living.
	Important Facts:
		- Each of these problems causes CPI to overstate cost of living increases
		- The BLS has made technical adjustments, but the CPI likely still overstates inflation by about 0.5% per year
		- This is important because Social Security payments and many contracts have COLAs tied to CPI
		- In 1990, it was estimated that CPI's bias cost taxpayers $1 trillion every 12 years

GDP Deflator vs. CPI
	1. GDP deflator reflects the prices of all goods and services produced domestically, whereas the CPI reflects the prices of all goods bought by typical consumers
		ex 1. The price of an airplane produced by Boeing and sold to the Air Force rises [Included in GDP Deflator, but not in CPI]
		ex 2. Volvo raises the price of cars imported from Switzerland [Not included in GDP Deflator, included in CPI]
	2. CPI uses a fixed basket of goods, while GDP deflator compares currently produced goods and services.
		1. Occasional change vs. always change
		2. Proportionate increases will not cause a discrepancy, but different price changes will
		ex 3. In each scenario, determine the effects on the CPI and GDP deflator.
			a. Starbucks raises the price of Frappucinos [GDP: Y CPI: Y]
			b. Caterpillar raises the price of the industrial tractors it manufactures at its Illinois factory [GDP: Y CPI: N]
			c. Armani raises the price of the imported Italian jeans it sells in the US [GDP: N CPI: Y]
Correcting variables for inflation
	1. Comparing Dollar figures from different times
		- Inflation makes it harder to compare dollar amounts from different times